OK.
NOTE CONF
We don't have time to waste this lecture.
So The dreaded Eukinins as uh you would perceive it
NOTE CONF
from, if you're talking to others, but It is a
clever algorithm.
NOTE CONF
In fact, I call it devilishly clever, fiendishly clever, as
I put it in the post.
NOTE CONF
But then if you look through the initial sort of,
Um, Mysticism of Yokinins, you will really see it's a
NOTE CONF
very brilliantly thought through algorithm.
And If once you've covered right, writing, so if you're
NOTE CONF
when you're implementing it, Um, I'll just say it upfront
that, well, you have to have a class for the
NOTE CONF
node and the edge and the traversal, and all the
bumps that you need when you're dealing with a tree
NOTE CONF
data structure.
But the core logic runs in less than half a
NOTE CONF
screen full, so it's that compact and clever.
So obviously you'll have to work towards that realisation.
NOTE CONF
So let's start.
So this is an algorithm to compute, um, I'll start
NOTE CONF
with this compute.
A tree that stores information of all suffixes of any
NOTE CONF
given string.
Here you see a string of really six letters, the
NOTE CONF
seventh letter is the dollar, the special dollar, terminal character.
And you have, including the dollars, 7 suffixes.
NOTE CONF
Do you all agree to that those suffixes?
Obviously, we've seen suffixes last week.
NOTE CONF
So for that string, those are the suffixes.
In, um, in the natural order of those suffixes, started
NOTE CONF
suffix starting at 1234567 in the string.
Now, if you constructed a suffix tree, You will see
NOTE CONF
a suffix tree like that.
In 2004, you constructed a suffix tree and then converted
NOTE CONF
into a suffix tree.
Do you remember that?
NOTE CONF
So what you see is that on the right-hand side
is a suffix tree that contains information of all suffixes
NOTE CONF
of a string, including that dollar sign, OK?
So if you have to find out what, what is,
NOTE CONF
what does, what does it mean by storing information of
all suffixes, going from root to any of the leaves,
NOTE CONF
you'll be spelling out one of the possible suffixes in
the strings.
NOTE CONF
So if you go A, B, A.
ABA dollar, that gives you a suffix, a leaf that
NOTE CONF
stores 1.
What is 1 in 1-ba indexing, it is a suffix
NOTE CONF
that starts at the root.
At position 1 in the string.
NOTE CONF
Does it make sense?
So, if you look at any other, so let's take
NOTE CONF
the suffix starting at 4 ABA dollars, so A B.
So ABA dollar, you store 4 because the suffix that's
NOTE CONF
ending in that leaf starts at 4, so.
What are you storing in the suffix tree?
NOTE CONF
There are nodes, there are edges.
The nodes are internal of two types, internal node and
NOTE CONF
a leaf node, right?
So leaf nodes are the red ones, the internal nodes
NOTE CONF
are those that are not red.
Does that make sense?
NOTE CONF
Everyone, so.
What are you storing on the edge?
NOTE CONF
What are you storing on an edge?
Clearly you're storing a substring of length, one or more,
NOTE CONF
correct?
Every edge there is a substring of length one or
NOTE CONF
more.
Do you see that?
NOTE CONF
Now, a substring, do you store them explicitly in a
suffix tree?
NOTE CONF
Do you know if you have, if you have done
that, um, in 2004, do you store explicitly those suffixes?
NOTE CONF
What do you do?
You just use two indices because a substring that has
NOTE CONF
a start point and point.
So you can really have a much more space efficient
NOTE CONF
data structure that looks like that.
So the, the suffix tree with all those substrings on
NOTE CONF
the edge explicitly on the left.
But if I, if the real storing is not as
NOTE CONF
explicitly as a substring.
By by using the representation where any um any edge,
NOTE CONF
let's say this is ABA dollar.
ABA dollar is essentially pointing to a substring starting at
NOTE CONF
4 ending at 7.
So that one instead of having ABA dollar, you'll be
NOTE CONF
storing two numbers, 4 and 7.
Well, let's take BA.
NOTE CONF
BA starts at 2 and ends at 3.
So you're storing 2.3.
NOTE CONF
In fact, there is a BA starting at 5 ending
at 6 as well.
NOTE CONF
So the number here really, the numbers here really don't
matter.
NOTE CONF
OK, the numbers what start point, end point doesn't matter.
What matters is the label, uh, essentially, the substring, it's
NOTE CONF
uh that uh that range spells out.
There could be multiple BA's in that example, in the
NOTE CONF
string, you're storing one instance of a BA so that
when you're traversing that edge, you know that's a B
NOTE CONF
the letters are BA.
The substring is BA.
NOTE CONF
Does it make sense?
OK.
NOTE CONF
And the claim is that going from this to this.
You would have ON space to represent a suffix tree.
NOTE CONF
Now, I want you to think about why going from
this to this, you go from ON squared space to
NOTE CONF
ON space, reason it.
It's a cute question.
NOTE CONF
Next week anyway, spend some time thinking about it.
So that's basically um what a suffix tree is.
NOTE CONF
Now, if you had to construct a suffix tree, not
by first constructing.
NOTE CONF
They try and then compressing the path compressing the suffix
tree, one could use an N2 algorithm, an order N2
NOTE CONF
algorithm, and is the length of the string, where you
are.
NOTE CONF
Inserting suffixes in the in their natural order, suffix 1
starting at 1, suffix starting at 2, suffix starting at
NOTE CONF
31 by one, with only with the only attention that
when two suffixes share the same prefix, then the path
NOTE CONF
up to the prefix is the same until they branch
out to different places.
NOTE CONF
Now we'll see what that means with this example.
So when you start the algorithm.
NOTE CONF
You are essentially starting the algorithm with an empty root
node.
NOTE CONF
Then you want to insert the first suffix, the big
1123456, A B C A B dollar.
NOTE CONF
That's easy.
Plonk uh an edge with 1.6 as your label and
NOTE CONF
then a leaf node, so you're doing some surgery, standing
on.
NOTE CONF
Uh, a root node adding a leaf underneath it, an
edge to it, and, and a leaf underneath it.
NOTE CONF
Does that make sense?
So you are just adding.
NOTE CONF
So when you started off, it's in that state, you've
just added one edge and the leaf node, leaf node
NOTE CONF
contains one because the suffix starting at 1, and, and
you hear I'm using explicit, by the way, uh, I'm
NOTE CONF
writing the string in the order of going from root
to the leaf, so it's going to be A B
NOTE CONF
C A B dollar that way, yeah, so you're going,
going down that way.
NOTE CONF
Um, I hope this has been fixed since last time.
Let me just see.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, apparently not.
Useless.
NOTE CONF
Um, But what could be the damn thing.
I've been teaching here for 17 years and never had
NOTE CONF
this problem.
Anyway, always a first.
NOTE CONF
OK.
So, um, So what we had was um inserted a
NOTE CONF
um a Inserted the first suffix.
Second suffix is BCAB dollar.
NOTE CONF
You already have this suffix.
Does BCAB dollar share any prefix path with ABC AB
NOTE CONF
dollar?
The answer is no, so it has to branch out
NOTE CONF
directly from the root.
Then the third suffix is CAB dollar.
NOTE CONF
Does CAB dollar have any prefix path with anything that
you have inserted previously?
NOTE CONF
The answer is no.
Then it goes, branches out from the root.
NOTE CONF
Now the fourth one is AB dollar.
Does it have a prefixed path from uh with uh
NOTE CONF
with some of the suffixes you already inserted?
Well, in fact, if you look at the suffix 1.
NOTE CONF
It has a B in the current state it has
to head towards C, but now you have AB with
NOTE CONF
a new symbol dollar, so you need to account for
the path.
NOTE CONF
So you need to break that edge, insert a new
node that way.
NOTE CONF
So you have to insert, break that edge, insert a
new node.
NOTE CONF
The old path was A B across.
That new node CB1 dollar, the new one is AB
NOTE CONF
dollar.
Does that make sense?
NOTE CONF
Now, and then the fifth one is B dollar, same
drill.
NOTE CONF
It shares the path with this one.
So BC AB dollar now has to be broken to
NOTE CONF
B dollar.
So that basically breaks down to B dollar.
NOTE CONF
Um, and then, uh, the last one is dollar.
Dollar is, uh, has to be a branch off from
NOTE CONF
the root, so that would be, uh, N2 approach.
Reason why there's an SN2 approach, I'm not, um, really
NOTE CONF
fussed about, um, explaining this here because I want to
use the time to talk about a cool algorithm.
NOTE CONF
OK.
You have to enjoy algorithms, uh, folks, otherwise it becomes.
NOTE CONF
Um, a boring thing.
So the hero of the story is Esko Ukonen or
NOTE CONF
how Howard, I'm sorry for all the Finnish mob in
the, in my cohort.
NOTE CONF
I must be murdering the pronunciation there, but you have
to bear with me.
NOTE CONF
Um, Yukinen, as I would, I would call it, um,
so, well, that's actually a younger version of, uh, Ukkinen.
NOTE CONF
His, um, this slide was created many years ago, so.
Uh, surely more than whatever the age that that's being
NOTE CONF
said.
So, I'm going to use the board primarily.
NOTE CONF
I'm, the slides are meant to be sort of there
to give you some context as we're chugging along.
NOTE CONF
So there are really 3 things.
The algorithm really has 3 things, quiet, please focus.
NOTE CONF
Algorithm has really 3 things to worry about, or at
least focus on.
NOTE CONF
Or 3 ingredients in it.
The first is something called an implicit suffix tree.
NOTE CONF
What does that mean?
We'll explain.
NOTE CONF
Second is called suffix links.
What the hell is that?
NOTE CONF
We'll explain again.
And the third are some tricks, OK?
NOTE CONF
Now We'll go one by one.
What is an implicit suffix tree?
NOTE CONF
Now, now take a look at the suffix tree for
the string, A, B, C, A terminated by a dollar.
NOTE CONF
You will agree, or at least take it, take it
as given that that's the suffix tree that contains all
NOTE CONF
suffixes of the string terminated by the dollar.
Now, if I withheld the dollar, if I constructed the
NOTE CONF
same tree without the dollar.
Do you agree that it will look like this on
NOTE CONF
the right?
Just focus.
NOTE CONF
It's the dollar that's creating the extra branches.
In fact, dollar, I'll say this, dollar forces the number
NOTE CONF
of leaves to be equal to the string length.
Because the dollar is unique, everything has to branch out
NOTE CONF
at a dollar.
Every path has to be uniquely splitting at a dollar
NOTE CONF
just because there's only $1.
If I remove the dollar, do you agree that you
NOTE CONF
will have some suffixes?
Implicit in longer suffixes.
NOTE CONF
So take a look at the suffix, um, let's say.
So if I remove the dollar, so let's say that
NOTE CONF
this dollar doesn't exist.
You only had A, B, C, A B.
NOTE CONF
So you have A B C A B, which is
ending at 1, B C A B that's ending here,
NOTE CONF
CAB that's ending there.
Next is A B which is implicit in the longer
NOTE CONF
one.
The, the last one is B, which is implicit in
NOTE CONF
the second longest one.
Yeah, in that, in that case, in that example.
NOTE CONF
Does it make sense?
So when I talk about an implicit suffix tree, all
NOTE CONF
I'm talking about is a suffix tree, in general, not
just about the last character removed.
NOTE CONF
In general, it is an implicit suffix tree of some
prefix of the.
NOTE CONF
String.
So here A B C A B is a prefix
NOTE CONF
of A B C A B dollar, but I could,
I could have constructed an implicit suffix tree of the
NOTE CONF
prefix ABC and it will have a suffix tree involving
ABC, B, C, and C.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, or if I had a prefix from 1 to
4, it will contain the suffixes A B C A
NOTE CONF
B C A C A, and A implicit in ABC.
OK, we'll, we'll see pictures of that later on, but
NOTE CONF
all implicit is saying is that it is a suffix
tree constructed on a prefix of this string.
NOTE CONF
Does that make sense?
Now, in fact, when does an explicit suff uh sorry,
NOTE CONF
when does an implicit suffix tree become explicit, the suffix
tree that you know, when the prefix is equal to
NOTE CONF
the string length.
Then the whole thing 123456 is included.
NOTE CONF
The sixth letter is included, dollar is included.
You can find a way to convert an implicit to
NOTE CONF
an explicit.
Now let's carry on.
NOTE CONF
And see what this algorithm is trying to do.
So what this algorithm is trying to do.
NOTE CONF
The entire description of algorithm is, the broad description is
what we're learning now.
NOTE CONF
And we'll see what that means.
So if I have a string 1 to N.
NOTE CONF
And I'm only interested in the prefix 1 to I.
So let's say that's the prefix 1 to I.
NOTE CONF
So I'm not interested in this part.
So I'm, if I have to construct the implicit Suffix
NOTE CONF
tree of I.
That suffix tree will contain.
NOTE CONF
All Suffixes from 1 to 1.
So you will have 1 to 12 to 13 to
NOTE CONF
I, all the way to I to I.
I to I would be a single letter, so I'll
NOTE CONF
just put that letter.
So all the information of 1 to 1, 221, 321,
NOTE CONF
42 I, all the way to I to I will
be in this tree.
NOTE CONF
Can you at least conceptualise that that information will be
in that tree?
NOTE CONF
Does it make sense?
As a concept idea now.
NOTE CONF
What the algorithm does is, if you have implicit suffix
tree I, you generate the implicit.
NOTE CONF
suffix 31 + 1.
The next, meaning that you're extended this by one letter.
NOTE CONF
Let's say a new letter has come at I +1.
So how do I, how do I extend implicit suffix
NOTE CONF
tree to an uh at ending at I to implicit
suffix tree at I + 1?
NOTE CONF
Well, I start In the implicit suffix tree.
So this is now, right now, implicit suffix tree of
NOTE CONF
I.
I know all these are already in it, right?
NOTE CONF
So I know 121, 221, 32 I is already in
the, in it.
NOTE CONF
So I'll do the first extension of I to I
+ 1 by starting at the root.
NOTE CONF
Finding the end I somewhere, so there'll be some path,
go along the path defined by 1 to I.
NOTE CONF
You understand that there's always going to be a path.
From Um, of any substring in a, in a tree.
NOTE CONF
Do you agree to that statement?
Because it's, it's a I, I've, I've used the word
NOTE CONF
substring, not just suffix in a suffix tree.
So in generally a suffix tree, let me, I did
NOTE CONF
say that in the post yesterday, that any substring is
a path from the root downwards.
NOTE CONF
If that substring goes to the to the leaf, it
becomes a suffix.
NOTE CONF
Why do I, why do I say that so confidently?
Because if I have.
NOTE CONF
I'll just draw it here momentarily.
So if I have some, some string, and if this
NOTE CONF
is a suffix starting at J, if I stop somewhere,
I'll be stopping at some K greater than equal to
NOTE CONF
J, which defines a substring, isn't it?
So any path.
NOTE CONF
Is a path from the root to any substring defines
a path from the root downwards.
NOTE CONF
So if I'm searching for 1 to I, I have
to start from root, search along these letters.
NOTE CONF
At some point, I'll reach to the 8th letter.
OK.
NOTE CONF
Now, because it's an implicit suffix tree, it could be
a part of a longer suffix.
NOTE CONF
So not the very first one, but in general, it
could be a part of the longer one.
NOTE CONF
I have to extend it by one letter.
The next suffix, I do the same thing, start from
NOTE CONF
the root, search, find the end of the, of the
implicit suffix tree ending at I, starting, so 2 to
NOTE CONF
I is searched, traversed from the root, extend by I
+ 1.
NOTE CONF
3 to 1, again from the root, extend by 1
+ 1.
NOTE CONF
I to I.
Extended by I + 1.
NOTE CONF
And then I have to insert a new suffix single
letter suffix I + 1.
NOTE CONF
And if I did that, all the changes I make
to the existing tree becomes the implicit suffix tree I
NOTE CONF
+ 1.
Does that make sense?
NOTE CONF
OK, so the idea is that the algorithm's overview is
keep generating, starting from.
NOTE CONF
An empty route Well, let's call it implicit suffix 30
in one-based indexing, because of the initial state.
NOTE CONF
First, construct implicit suffix tree one, which contains all suffixes
of the prefix 1 to 1.
NOTE CONF
There's only one character, then.
Use that to construct implicit suffix 32, which means that
NOTE CONF
you're taking 1 to 1, extending it by the second
letter, and then adding the second letter as a second
NOTE CONF
suffix of 1 to 2.
So 1 to 2 suffixes are 1 to 2 and
NOTE CONF
2 to 22 to 2 is every time there's going
to be one single character suffix at the very end.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Then you take the implicit suffix 32 at, at, at
NOTE CONF
position 2.
Construct 3 by extending 1 to 2 by the character
NOTE CONF
X 32 to 2 by character act 3, and add
the character X 3.
NOTE CONF
And then you keep doing it until you get to
the very end.
NOTE CONF
The very end would be $1.
So suddenly in the last.
NOTE CONF
Phase, so when you talk about a phase, it is
the it's the iteration I, iteration phase 0, phase 1,
NOTE CONF
phase 2, phase 3, all the way to phase to
phase N, you end up constructing an an explicit suffix
NOTE CONF
tree because dollar will force you to split all parts
of the suffixes.
NOTE CONF
That is the algorithm.
Now, what would be the complexity if I did that?
NOTE CONF
We'll go and look at the example, a concrete example.
What would be the algorithm?
NOTE CONF
What would be the complexity if I did this?
Yes, sir.
NOTE CONF
One option would be N2.
OK, I'll quickly say that it would be an n
NOTE CONF
cubed algorithm.
So in fact, Ekanen's starting point is an algorithm worse
NOTE CONF
than what you've learned.
OK, this is the algorithm everything else are tricks, but
NOTE CONF
before we get to the tricks, we will solidify some
finer details of this um of.
NOTE CONF
Um, of this thing, by the way, there are only
4 tricks in Eukanen.
NOTE CONF
There are 4 tricks out of which many of them
are simple, OK?
NOTE CONF
Maybe 1 will require you to pay attention, that's all.
Now, if So we are doing this.
NOTE CONF
So what I'm calling a phase is going from phase
is that letter I, going from initial state to 123456
NOTE CONF
all the way to the end.
And then in each, each thing, I have an extension,
NOTE CONF
a suffix extension of 1 to J.
1 to I to I + 12 to I to
NOTE CONF
I + 1.
So J to I to I + 1.
NOTE CONF
So, I'm using J to mean an a suffix extension,
where you're trying to find in extension J or phase
NOTE CONF
I.
You're trying to find, start at the root, go along
NOTE CONF
the path J J +1, J + 2, J +
3, all the way to I, and then once you
NOTE CONF
reach there, I say, what do I do to extend
this to the next letter?
NOTE CONF
What scenarios could appear when I extend it to the
next letter?
NOTE CONF
So I'll directly jump to an example.
So there's a pseudo code about what to do, which
NOTE CONF
is, which is basically, but we'll, we'll just skip on
these slides.
NOTE CONF
We'll just go to an example so that.
Um, you will see something called rules there, ignore the
NOTE CONF
rule, uh, so I'll just bring up the first slide.
So you'll see some rule here.
NOTE CONF
We'll, we'll figure out.
I'll explain what this is in a bit, and then
NOTE CONF
we'll give a very clear understanding of what the rules
are.
NOTE CONF
So when you start the algorithm, you just have a
root.
NOTE CONF
Now, when you start phase one.
You have to deal with extending nothing by one letter,
NOTE CONF
which is at one.
So what is the operation you would do to, when
NOTE CONF
you're nothing, you're already at the root.
From standing on the root, which already exists, you have
NOTE CONF
to do some surgery to account for a path towards.
The first letter.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So what surgery would you do to the tree?
NOTE CONF
Well, you have to.
Add A leaf node hanging off an existing internal node.
NOTE CONF
Root is an existing internal, by definition, root is an
internal node, OK.
NOTE CONF
It might appear that when you start with 11 node
it must be a leaf.
NOTE CONF
Well, that's not how it works.
A root in a tree is always internal, OK, by
NOTE CONF
definition.
Now everything a leaf node will get its manifestation in,
NOTE CONF
uh, later on beyond below the below the um root.
So can you see here that you have created an
NOTE CONF
internal node.
Hunger, hung it to an existing, so sorry, you've created
NOTE CONF
a.
My bad.
NOTE CONF
I'll say that again.
You've created a leaf node and you've hung it to
NOTE CONF
an existing internal node, and you've labelled the edge by.
1.1.
NOTE CONF
Does that make sense why it's 1.1?
Because it's, it's a single character that you've added.
NOTE CONF
The character is the character at position 1.
So it starts at 1 ends at 1, because every
NOTE CONF
substring has a start point and end point, and it's
a substring of length one.
NOTE CONF
Makes sense, everyone?
Now, please pay attention because if you pay attention here,
NOTE CONF
it will take so much of grief later on, yeah.
So, So I'm calling this rule to alternate.
NOTE CONF
We'll worry about that a bit later.
Just know that, just try and do some pattern matching
NOTE CONF
with the text that's appearing here.
Whenever you see a rule to alternate, I'm hanging a
NOTE CONF
leaf node to an existing internal node.
And by the way, what is the label on the
NOTE CONF
leaf node?
It is one because it is talking about.
NOTE CONF
Not where the suffix ends.
It takes, talks about where the suffix starts, because it
NOTE CONF
starts at one and ends at one, you're seeing one,
it starts at one, so the leaf node contains one.
NOTE CONF
Have you finished phase one?
Are there any more extensions to do in phase one?
NOTE CONF
Because you have all suffixes of the phase are complete.
So all suffixes of the prefix 1 to 1 are
NOTE CONF
complete.
So you go to phase two.
NOTE CONF
Phase two, see what happens.
Well, after you can do phase two extension one, so
NOTE CONF
you're now have to extend A by, so I'll do
use here.
NOTE CONF
A has to be extended by a B.
Exist previously there was an A, the tree had an
NOTE CONF
A, you have to extend by a B.
So what you have done is you've not created anything
NOTE CONF
new, you only adjusted the endpoint of the leaf label,
right?
NOTE CONF
Previously it was 1.1.
Now it becomes 1.2.
NOTE CONF
Does that make sense, everyone?
Yeah, so that's a rule.
NOTE CONF
What an associate, whenever you're changing the endpoint of a
leaf label, it's called rule one.
NOTE CONF
So associate rule one with that.
We'll see what those rules are in a bit.
NOTE CONF
Then So we, we have done phase extension 1 of
phase 2.
NOTE CONF
Now we have extension 2 of phase 2, so you
still have one more thing to do.
NOTE CONF
So, There's nothing previously.
Now you have to extend that nothing by B.
NOTE CONF
So from root, you're branching off towards B, that's gonna
be 2.2.
NOTE CONF
Does that make sense?
Now let's, are there any more extensions in this phase?
NOTE CONF
No more, isn't it?
1222 is over now we start phase 3.
NOTE CONF
Now focus what happens to this, um, uh, the first
suffix.
NOTE CONF
It again becomes rule 1 extension because you're extending the
endpoint by 1 more.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, so 12 became 13, right?
That's what happened.
NOTE CONF
Then what do you think, do you think the same
thing will happen in the next extension 2 of phase
NOTE CONF
3?
What will happen in, in sec uh extension 2 of
NOTE CONF
phase 3, phase 3?
Is it rule one again?
NOTE CONF
So that there you go, you just extend.
And then You will have to, what would happen to,
NOTE CONF
um, so forget about the rules, but what would happen
if I did.
NOTE CONF
Extension 3 of phase 3 with the tree change.
Anything change?
NOTE CONF
What is the third letter is A.
There was nothing previously.
NOTE CONF
You're at the root, nothing previously.
You have, you don't, if there's nothing previously, you don't
NOTE CONF
have to reverse to the end.
You're already at the end.
NOTE CONF
Now you have to account for the new letter A.
Does the new path exist already?
NOTE CONF
The new path exists.
A already exists, so you kind of do nothing, and
NOTE CONF
when you do nothing is rule 3.
OK.
NOTE CONF
Now, let's keep going, uh, maybe a little more.
So phase 4, you finished phase 3.
NOTE CONF
Phase 4, again, the same thing, it's a rule 1
extension because I went from that was 13 before, now
NOTE CONF
it became 14, 23 becomes 24.
Now, 33, so rather, um, the suffix starting at 3.
NOTE CONF
Now tell me what happens here.
I just want to pause here.
NOTE CONF
What happens next?
In extension 3 of Phase 4.
NOTE CONF
So you have to search for a to.
Uh, so, A at position 3, a path that's starting
NOTE CONF
from J to I extended by I + 1, the
next character, right?
NOTE CONF
So J is 3, I is 3, OK?
Previously, I plus 1, you're doing the 4th.
NOTE CONF
So, um, I'm saying that I'm, I'm going from the
previous state to the next state, right?
NOTE CONF
So I'm previous state, let's assume.
Let's say if I is, I, I sometimes would use
NOTE CONF
I as the previous state and I + 1 as
the next state, next phase.
NOTE CONF
If I'm using I as the current phase, then I
minus 1 would be the previous phase.
NOTE CONF
So, let's say if you, if, so in, in the
state of the suffix tree, you would have to look
NOTE CONF
for a suffix starting at J equals 3, ending where
the previous phase has ended, which would be 3 again.
NOTE CONF
And then extended by 11 more.
So what would happen here?
NOTE CONF
Anyone?
Yourself.
NOTE CONF
So what, what, what would happen?
Explain what, what would happen.
NOTE CONF
So it would have to branch, so go down to
A.
NOTE CONF
So the idea was you go down to A, but
next letter is B, but you want to basically branch
NOTE CONF
off towards A A.
Now you have previously A B, now you have A
NOTE CONF
A, so you have to create that a branch by
creating a new internal node and a leaf hanging off
NOTE CONF
it.
Now this is like the older rule too is.
NOTE CONF
Have I confused someone?
Should I go back?
NOTE CONF
You answered, I thought you would be the most clear.
Go on.
NOTE CONF
It was because at the end of the road there
was a tree.
NOTE CONF
OK, so you're saying, why?
Why is this two-fold?
NOTE CONF
Going on the red.
Yeah, because it is where the suffix starts.
NOTE CONF
It's always leaf node will always contain where the suffix
starts.
NOTE CONF
Good point.
I think that's a good, uh, thing to be confused
NOTE CONF
about so that I can explain it explicitly so.
Uh, nodes always point to where the suffix started, not
NOTE CONF
where they ended, yeah.
So, now, Can you see that you've actually created a
NOTE CONF
new internal node, a new leaf, and hanging the new
leaf to a new internal node.
NOTE CONF
Can you see that?
It's slightly different from the previous rule 2 where you
NOTE CONF
had a new leaf hung to an existing internal node.
Now you're creating a new internal node and hanging a
NOTE CONF
new leaf to a new internal node.
So, so this is what we call a regular rule
NOTE CONF
2.
I mean, whatever Rule 2A and Rule 2 B.
NOTE CONF
OK, the regular rule 2 is you have to create
a new internal node and hang a new leaf off
NOTE CONF
it.
A rule to alternate would be hanging a new leaf
NOTE CONF
on the existing one, and much of the remaining ones,
so essentially we've covered what rule one, which was extension
NOTE CONF
on the edge to the leaf, Rule 2 regular, where
you're creating a new internal node and a new leaf
NOTE CONF
off it.
Rule 2 alternate, you're creating a new leaf but hanging
NOTE CONF
off the existing internal node, and Rule 3 where you
do nothing.
NOTE CONF
And essentially all operations that could happen, all scenarios that
could happen would be one of those scenarios.
NOTE CONF
Um, I will just quickly go to, I'll just fast
forward to, um, end of, uh, phase 5.
NOTE CONF
So, uh, phase six.
So after you finish, it's an implicit suffix 3 of
NOTE CONF
all suffixes of the prefix 1 to 6, that's the
state.
NOTE CONF
Now, let's see what happens when you do phase seven.
Phase seven is A B A B A B A
NOTE CONF
ABA dollar that becomes a rule 1 extension.
Do you agree?
NOTE CONF
Then BAABA dollar, you're searching, starting from the root, searching
for BAA BA BA, the previous, the end of previous
NOTE CONF
phase, and then that will get you to the, to
the leaf and you only have to do a leaf
NOTE CONF
extension.
So that would be 26 becomes 27.
NOTE CONF
Do you see that?
Now, Then extension 3 AABA dollar, you go down and
NOTE CONF
extend that.
Does that make sense?
NOTE CONF
Now, 4 is ABA, so ABA and there was nothing
else.
NOTE CONF
Now if you say ABA dollars, if you go down.
A You come down to this part, you can no
NOTE CONF
longer step down to the leaf, you're standing on, when
you do apply the rule, you're standing on this node.
NOTE CONF
And apply the rule, right?
Now what rule would it be when I apply?
NOTE CONF
Do ABA, the next, next extension 4.
Of Phase 7 Rule to what?
NOTE CONF
Regular.
So there you go, it will be rule 2 regular,
NOTE CONF
OK?
Then When you, and let's do the same thing.
NOTE CONF
Next one, after 4 will be 5.
BA you search for BA, so you're standing here, you
NOTE CONF
can no longer go down because BA follows an A,
but you want to branch out to uh a dollar
NOTE CONF
sign.
So you create that, and then A dollar, $1 and
NOTE CONF
that becomes an explicit suffix tree.
OK.
NOTE CONF
So if you did this algorithm, which is cubed, It
is, uh, it is basically, basically what you will see,
NOTE CONF
um, is an explicit suffix tree at the very end.
Now.
NOTE CONF
Now, let's understand the rules a bit more clearly.
So pay attention, please.
NOTE CONF
It is very important to pay attention in this lecture.
So, rule one, now let's reason this abstractly.
NOTE CONF
What is really happening?
So let's say you had.
NOTE CONF
We've already finished 1 to I, and you're doing the
next phase I + 1.
NOTE CONF
Does that make sense?
So if implicit suffix tree I is extended to the
NOTE CONF
next one, OK.
And let's say that you are doing.
NOTE CONF
Some extension J, meaning that J can be 123456 all
the way to I, yeah.
NOTE CONF
And then the last one would be uh I +
1 extension.
NOTE CONF
Every time in the phase, you have a single character
extension at the very end.
NOTE CONF
Now If that string, if you're looking into a tree,
if you suppose, let's say that you have a tree,
NOTE CONF
so what you're doing is going down the path.
Character at J, character of J + 1.
NOTE CONF
So I'm drawing a squiggly line because the path could
be With some letters, some labels associated with it squiggly
NOTE CONF
lines implies that they're There are some nodes below it,
0 or more nodes below it, right?
NOTE CONF
So J, J +1, J + 2.
All the way at some point, let's say, Um, that's
NOTE CONF
Let's say you have I.
So that's your path.
NOTE CONF
Let's call this alpha.
That's the path alpha from the root.
NOTE CONF
Now When you do a leaf extension, what does this
mean?
NOTE CONF
It means that I have This extension, which ends in
a leaf node, or rather J to I ends in
NOTE CONF
a leaf node.
The path ends.
NOTE CONF
There's a, there will be a last character after that
would be a leaf note.
NOTE CONF
OK.
When does this happen?
NOTE CONF
It it happens when this alpha was never observed previously.
Because every, if there was an alpha somewhere here, then
NOTE CONF
I would have seen this alpha followed by some letter
in the tree.
NOTE CONF
Right, so because every, every suffix before J was already
included into it in the tree, because you're doing the
NOTE CONF
extensions and phases left to right.
So if I haven't seen J to I sometime before,
NOTE CONF
then this path is unique that ends in a leaf,
and that was when you see a rule one.
NOTE CONF
Now, when do you see rule two regular?
Anyone?
NOTE CONF
Let's say that I have seen.
Alpha.
NOTE CONF
J to I is what I'm extending to I +
1.
NOTE CONF
I've seen whatever is in this substring before, let's actually
draw it roughly the same size.
NOTE CONF
At one or more places before.
That means that this alpha was observed previously.
NOTE CONF
Remember, any suffix that shares the same prefix will have
the same path, right?
NOTE CONF
So that's the whole idea of a suffix tree.
You're not creating distinct paths every time.
NOTE CONF
Whenever you see some repeats, you're going to have that
suffix repeated, right?
NOTE CONF
So do you, do you get that?
All right, so now, but then, if it's rule 2
NOTE CONF
regular, what do you do in rule 2 regular?
What happens in route to regular?
NOTE CONF
Remember someone, remember?
New internal node and a leaf hanging off it, which
NOTE CONF
means that somehow, you have to create a uh let
me actually do a new colour.
NOTE CONF
You have to create.
Um You have to create a branch in, in the
NOTE CONF
existing state.
When do you have to create an existing, uh, a
NOTE CONF
branch in the existing state?
Let's say that this letter was some Z.
NOTE CONF
It can be any letter.
Let's call, let's say the one that you have to
NOTE CONF
extend this letter Z.
Every time you saw alpha, you were seeing some letter,
NOTE CONF
always the same letter, but that's not Z.
That means that before You Z was accounted for, you
NOTE CONF
would have had I followed by Y because there's this
suffix has alpha, Y, this suffix has alpha Y, we've
NOTE CONF
already accounted that previously.
So alpha Y is what you would have seen, but
NOTE CONF
now because you have Z coming through, you have to
break this into a path that goes towards Y originally,
NOTE CONF
and then the new one, that's.
Heading that way.
NOTE CONF
By the way, what would be the label of This
edge I + 1 to 1 + 1.
NOTE CONF
Does everyone agree to that statement?
Yeah It would be Z, right?
NOTE CONF
It would be Z.
So Z is I + 1.
NOTE CONF
So that is what you have to store, but you're
storing in start point end point, uh, suggestion, um.
NOTE CONF
That Yash, is that your name?
Raj, sorry.
NOTE CONF
Um, uh, Raj Kve was Um, Was I +1 to
I +1, which is the same as your answer Z,
NOTE CONF
except that's how you store it.
Do you agree to that statement?
NOTE CONF
So by the way, whenever you create, I'm just going
to, because I'm calling the new, the the phase that
NOTE CONF
you're currently dealing with as I +1.
So you're still doing I +1 to I +1.
NOTE CONF
Do you, I'm going to generalise this idea.
When you first create a leaf, any leaf, is it
NOTE CONF
always true that you create?
Whatever the face ID is as a single character.
NOTE CONF
Always, always the leaf will have one letter to it,
and that letter would be same as.
NOTE CONF
The the character at that phase, or if it's start
point, endpoint, the phase number itself.
NOTE CONF
We'll actually look at some examples here.
So, let's look at Um, when we Let's actually look
NOTE CONF
at some new, whenever we created rule tools, basically.
So rule 2.
NOTE CONF
I mean, I'm calling it I +1 because the phase
is I + 1.
NOTE CONF
Here, the phase is I, it's a bit confusing, uh,
but because the previous phase there was I minus 1,
NOTE CONF
the next phase is I.
If you assume that the, uh, next phase is whatever
NOTE CONF
the phase number, instead of calling it I or I
+ 1, whatever the phase number, what the label would
NOTE CONF
be is phase number, comma phase number.
So here is phase number, phase number.
NOTE CONF
Do you agree?
Here's phase number, phase number.
NOTE CONF
Here's phase number, phase number, whenever we're creating a new
leaf.
NOTE CONF
Can you see that?
Phase number, phase number.
NOTE CONF
So every time you're creating a new, um, applying rule
to, regular or alternate, we'll see where, when they, so
NOTE CONF
here's a case where do you see it's when you
created a new leaf, it's a single letter, which is
NOTE CONF
phase number, comma phase number.
So whenever you create a leaf, it seems to be
NOTE CONF
always pointing to the phase number, the endpoint especially is
pointing to the phase number, endpoint.
NOTE CONF
So if you look at any leaf, actually, I'll finish
this.
NOTE CONF
I'll finish this.
Look at any leaf.
NOTE CONF
Any leaf The last endpoint will always be pointing to
the phase number.
NOTE CONF
Do you agree to that statement?
I mean, at least by observation, you have to agree.
NOTE CONF
Because what you would have to, you, what you will
be doing when you first create, you create a single
NOTE CONF
letter which is pointing to the phase, and then you're
extending it by the next letter that's coming through, next
NOTE CONF
letter you're coming through.
Always it'll be the phase number at the very end
NOTE CONF
anyway.
So always the end point would be phase number.
NOTE CONF
Now, we're coming back to this, that when you do
a rule to regular, the idea would be that you've
NOTE CONF
seen J to I before one or more times, and
every time you've seen that string alpha.
NOTE CONF
J to I previously, it was preceded by some character
that is not.
NOTE CONF
The one that you, that you're extending by.
OK.
NOTE CONF
Here it's Z.
These are Y.
NOTE CONF
So you have to branch off.
So when, when would it be rule to alternate?
NOTE CONF
Can someone reason this abstractly?
Alternate When he, um, like the als, they are followed
NOTE CONF
by an X and a Y maybe.
Very good.
NOTE CONF
So there are You've seen one or more times, uh,
you, you've seen.
NOTE CONF
Um, alphas that at least twice in this case, or
at least twice, because you need a distinct path associated
NOTE CONF
with it.
So, so you've seen alphas before, 2 or more times,
NOTE CONF
and then it is followed by some paths.
So if you look at, at this position P1, at
NOTE CONF
disposition P2, let's say you have some.
Alpha path, whatever this this path is, is that alpha.
NOTE CONF
At the end of alpha, you would have to branch
out one towards X and one towards Y.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
And then you get Z.
NOTE CONF
At this alpha, J J to I extended by 1
+ 1 needs to be extended towards Z.
NOTE CONF
This is always going to be the phase number 1
+ 11 + 1.
NOTE CONF
And then what would be the What would you store?
In the leaf node.
NOTE CONF
What's the label of the leaf node?
Jay Correct?
NOTE CONF
Does that make sense?
So you have.
NOTE CONF
You essentially have a rule to alternate when you have
seen alpha before, but that structure already had an existing
NOTE CONF
branch and you have to now branch towards another yet
another character, which means that you only have to hang
NOTE CONF
a leaf of an existing internal node.
Does that make sense?
NOTE CONF
Yeah, now, when is it rule 3?
You see this is easy.
NOTE CONF
Anyone, anyone who hasn't yet spoken?
It already exists, which means that one of them is
NOTE CONF
a Z.
The moment you see alpha Z, alpha Z exists, that
NOTE CONF
means that there would have been an alpha.
Z direction, there could be um alpha Z or if
NOTE CONF
all of them are Z, you'll basically see Um Alpha
followed by a Z, like in that state.
NOTE CONF
If one of them is a different letter, Y, then
you will see alpha.
NOTE CONF
Followed by Z and a Y and then this one
would be a rule 3 extension.
NOTE CONF
OK.
So whatever the case, so I've explained both by demonstration
NOTE CONF
of the rules in an example and abstractly what those
cases are, and I, I, I guarantee you there won't
NOTE CONF
be any other scenarios.
I just want you to remember that what are we
NOTE CONF
doing again?
So when you have finished a phase I.
NOTE CONF
And you're doing an extension.
You have implicit suffix for phase I completed.
NOTE CONF
You're doing the next phase 1 plus 1.
You're extending the implicit suffix i by one letter starting
NOTE CONF
from 1 to i extended by 12 to i extended
by one letter, 3 to i extended by one letter,
NOTE CONF
all the.
to the end, right?
NOTE CONF
For in doing that, you are traversing the path from
the previous phase.
NOTE CONF
The if you're looking at extension J of phase I
+ 1, which is the current phase, the previous phase
NOTE CONF
was I, and you're saying walk down the path in
the direction of J J +1, J + 2, J
NOTE CONF
+ 3, or hop along from one vertex down until
you can no longer hop.
NOTE CONF
You don't want to hop onto the leaf.
You have to stop at an.
NOTE CONF
Existing internal node and apply one of these 31 of
those 3 rules or 24 rules if you want to
NOTE CONF
call rule 2 alternate and rule 2 regular at different
ones.
NOTE CONF
So you have to apply rule 1 or rule 2
alternate or rule 2 regular or rule 3.
NOTE CONF
OK, so one of, does it make sense what we're
doing here?
NOTE CONF
OK, so Now All this thinking requires you to traverse
in every extension from the route, correct?
NOTE CONF
So, we have explained what the algorithm does at a
high level.
NOTE CONF
We explained what an implicit suffix tree is and when
it becomes explicit.
NOTE CONF
The second part of the three ingredients was suffix links.
So we'll see what suffix links mean.
NOTE CONF
Before I bring up that slide, which will worry you,
which is actually more a formal definition rather than an
NOTE CONF
intuition.
I'll give you an intuition, you can worry about the
NOTE CONF
formal definitions later on.
So love.
NOTE CONF
If I have to Let's Draw some extension.
J Of phase where the next letter that you have
NOTE CONF
to account for is some Z at I + 1.
You finished phase 1, you're doing phase I plus 1.
NOTE CONF
So, I've already told you that.
Then, how do you extend?
NOTE CONF
You start at the root.
So that route, traversal of the root would be in
NOTE CONF
the direction of J J +1, J + 2.
At some point, you would get to some node, let's
NOTE CONF
call this node U.
Below which Let's actually say that this NZK minus 1,
NOTE CONF
I'll just tell you in a bit what that means.
KK + 1 all the way to I.
NOTE CONF
So these are characters, they are not, so although you're
storing starting points, if you translate them into strings, it
NOTE CONF
will be, it'll spell out uh a substring, right?
If you the path will going down in the direction
NOTE CONF
from J towards I will spell out the substring J
to I.
NOTE CONF
Before you could complete the extension of I to I
+1, before you could account for apply a rule to
NOTE CONF
account for Z, you would have been standing on some
deepest internal node.
NOTE CONF
You'd be standing on some deepest internal node under which
you are applying the rule, under which you're doing the
NOTE CONF
surgery.
Does that sort of ring.
NOTE CONF
Even if it's not fully clear, at least the mechanics
broadly should.
NOTE CONF
OK.
Now, when you're there, what you would have done is
NOTE CONF
traversed, let's say that was a route, you would have
traversed up to you.
NOTE CONF
So really you want to go down, except that this
remaining part is on a direct below you directly.
NOTE CONF
You can no longer traverse any further along this path.
So, which means that this path is K minus, so
NOTE CONF
J to K minus 1 is the string that you
have covered.
NOTE CONF
What is remaining?
K2 I.
NOTE CONF
Do you agree?
So if you've gone down, stopped at you, what's remaining
NOTE CONF
is K K + 1, K + 2 all the
way to I.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So the remaining bit is K K + 1 all
NOTE CONF
the way to I.
Now Because we call this alpha, let's call this part.
NOTE CONF
Alpha.
What is alpha?
NOTE CONF
Alpha is the string from J to some K minus
1, which is less than or equal to I.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So you're somewhere in between that range, some substring, so
NOTE CONF
you're traversing down from the root, you stopped at some
U.
NOTE CONF
Now You apply some rule.
It doesn't matter what rule you apply.
NOTE CONF
You do Rule 1 or Rule 2 or Rule 3.
You discover it's Rule 3, which means that there's nothing
NOTE CONF
you have to do.
Then what do you do in the next extension of
NOTE CONF
the same phase?
Yup, let's see if anyone else wants to engage.
NOTE CONF
What the idea would be that this is what you
have done in extension J of phase I + 1.
NOTE CONF
Now what will happen in the next phase I +
1?
NOTE CONF
What do you do in the next place I +
1.
NOTE CONF
I'll come back to you in a sec.
Um, anyone who wants to engage, give a, doesn't have
NOTE CONF
to be a right answer as long as you're thinking.
Yes, I'll take your, your.
NOTE CONF
we don't have Without any tricks, you repeat from the
top, which means that root, you repeat from the root.
NOTE CONF
And what direction would you traverse?
Yes, sir.
NOTE CONF
J +1, J + 2, J + 3, which means
that you restart the whole process.
NOTE CONF
And let's assume that J and J +1 are different
characters.
NOTE CONF
They don't have to be different, but if they are
different characters, you'll be potentially going down a path.
NOTE CONF
OK.
Now, when you go down this path.
NOTE CONF
What if I told you?
That There will exist a Node V.
NOTE CONF
If there, or rather what if I told you that
if there exists a node V, where the path ending
NOTE CONF
at J +1 to K minus 1, so you're traversing.
J + 1.
NOTE CONF
So that would be from that point onwards, J +
1.
NOTE CONF
You're traversing until the same point.
So J +1, J + 2, J + 3.
NOTE CONF
So the first letter was some C you ignore the
first letter at J.
NOTE CONF
You are now traversing in the direction of alpha minus
the first letter C, right?
NOTE CONF
The whatever the alpha was uh starting at J to
K minus 1.
NOTE CONF
Now you're looking at exclude the first letter C.
Now you're doing whatever is the remaining, let's maybe we'll
NOTE CONF
call it beta prime.
B, so this, everything from J + 1 to K
NOTE CONF
minus 1 will be.
So you would be traversing beta.
NOTE CONF
To that point, if there exists a path where U
was C followed by beta.
NOTE CONF
And so R to U is a path which was
C followed by whatever.
NOTE CONF
So this was the whole thing we call alpha, but
alpha can be decomposed into first letter followed by the
NOTE CONF
remaining.
The remaining was a substring of some length, one letter
NOTE CONF
followed by substring of some length.
Some length would be 0123, or whatever.
NOTE CONF
Then the idea would be that if there exists two
internal nodes, so this is an internal node, this is
NOTE CONF
an internal node, then if I can find a shortcut
to that node.
NOTE CONF
If I can find a shortcut to that node, suffix
link is just about finding a shortcut.
NOTE CONF
I'll maybe write it in a different colour.
So that's a shortcut.
NOTE CONF
If I find a shortcut to that node, then the
idea would be that rather than traversing, so when I
NOTE CONF
did Extension J of phase 1 + 1.
I was already standing at U.
NOTE CONF
I was already at you And I had this remainder
to complete or apply a rule after the remainder.
NOTE CONF
Then after I finished, rather than go to the top,
I'll go to its partner V because there's a suffix
NOTE CONF
link from U to V.
If I can find a way to create such shortcuts.
NOTE CONF
While I'm constructing the tree, then.
Because it's an existing node.
NOTE CONF
And it already has, let's say, exists if we make
a rule, if we sort of had this algorithm, algorithmic
NOTE CONF
design, where any existing If I had an algorithmic design
where Any existing, um, my blue pen has gone to
NOTE CONF
fall into the crack, unfortunately, now.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
Hell, I can't get it.
OK.
NOTE CONF
So if, ah, I'll say that again.
So, um, If in my algorithmic design, If all existing
NOTE CONF
internal nodes already have their suffix links with them, then
I've stopped at an existing internal node when I do
NOTE CONF
the operation in the jet extension of phase 11.
When I have to start the J + 1 extension
NOTE CONF
rather than go all the way to the root and
do the traversal, I will follow the, the suffix link
NOTE CONF
of U to V if that exists.
And it will always exist in the way we create
NOTE CONF
this.
If you, if you know what the suffix link is
NOTE CONF
from U to V, then this part is redundant.
All you have to do is.
NOTE CONF
This path becomes redundant.
You can pick and do the remaining, that would be
NOTE CONF
the remainder.
The remainder, whatever the remainder KK plus 1 to I
NOTE CONF
has to be traversed below, so that's you only have
to worry about traversing the remainder starting from V.
NOTE CONF
So rather than starting from.
Route you're starting from the partner of V where as
NOTE CONF
a partner of you where you was the node that
you were standing, the deepest node you were standing on
NOTE CONF
when you applied the extension in extension.
So you finish extension J.
NOTE CONF
You go to its suffix link and traverse the remainder
because if you can see here you stopped at you
NOTE CONF
and did you and applied a rule now you have
a pointer to V.
NOTE CONF
Now we also needs to travel the same path which
is the remainder so you would basically.
NOTE CONF
Shortcut your traversal a bit more easily.
Now I'll bring up this slide.
NOTE CONF
So, speeding up the traversal is that if you have
any sort of, um, If you, if you had any.
NOTE CONF
Um, suffix extension.
Then what you can do is There's pote potentially for
NOTE CONF
every, not potentially, for every internal node, look at the
observation, for every internal node of an implicit suffix tree,
NOTE CONF
there has to be, A suffix link that goes out
of it.
NOTE CONF
One suffix link, out of it.
Now Can someone reason why that's the case?
NOTE CONF
What's the shortest path any internal node other than the
root can have?
NOTE CONF
What's the smallest substring that you could traverse, if you're,
if you have to go below the root node, what
NOTE CONF
would be Uh, the smallest substring that you could traverse.
Yes, sir.
NOTE CONF
Oh, so in terms of number in length would be
one letter.
NOTE CONF
So the, the smallest, uh, the smallest substring you will
travel is one letter.
NOTE CONF
So if.
You have An internal node, below the root of one
NOTE CONF
letter, what would it be, it's, if that is you,
what would be V?
NOTE CONF
Yes, Why would it be the root?
It because.
NOTE CONF
Because it's once, so you have to remove the first
character and everything after that becomes the path from R
NOTE CONF
to V.
So R to you, I'll just say this explicitly.
NOTE CONF
So if you have R to you, That spells out
the path.
NOTE CONF
Um, C first character C followed by some substring.
Um Beta prime Then the path from R to U
NOTE CONF
R R2 V.
So R2U would be C, followed by beta, R2V would
NOTE CONF
have to be the path beta except excluding the first
one.
NOTE CONF
If The situation is R with only one single letter
C.
NOTE CONF
And you then beta prime is empty.
Yeah, beta is empty.
NOTE CONF
If beta is empty, this has to be V, isn't
it?
NOTE CONF
What is the empty path from the root?
It is basically itself so and so.
NOTE CONF
There will be a suffix link back to the root.
So you get speed ups when V is not the
NOTE CONF
route.
If V goes back to the root, what does it
NOTE CONF
mean?
You're doing the same explicit extension from the root because
NOTE CONF
you have to, the remainder would be everything else.
Right?
NOTE CONF
Does it make sense?
So every time you're getting a shortcut is when you
NOTE CONF
and we are nodes that are, so this is not
um a node, which is the root.
NOTE CONF
By the way, by definition, root is an internal node.
Well, you can, as a corner case, it is a
NOTE CONF
suffix link to itself, because there's no letter to it.
So you define suffix link from U to V, where
NOTE CONF
the path from U to V is at least one
letter wrong.
NOTE CONF
So by, you know, if you want to initialise your
classes with suffix link, a node, a root node will
NOTE CONF
be a suffix link to itself, meaning that if you
went and traversed around itself, you could land back at
NOTE CONF
the root, root to itself.
Everything else is pointing to another internal node.
NOTE CONF
Sometimes the internal node will point to the root.
Does that make sense?
NOTE CONF
Now, I'll just pull up an example of a.
Of a tree with suffix links, so that we fully
NOTE CONF
understand what it is.
So you There's only part of one letter.
NOTE CONF
If that is you, it's V is root.
This is a path with one letter.
NOTE CONF
If that's you, that's V is, is the root.
Now, if this is you, the path is A B,
NOTE CONF
that means that the first letter is C, the next
beta is the letter B, single letter B.
NOTE CONF
So what is the node which has beta as its
path?
NOTE CONF
Beta is B, so, so it is pointing to that
node.
NOTE CONF
Does it make sense?
So, um, this part is BA, first letter is B,
NOTE CONF
the remaining, uh, substring is A.
What is the, this, uh, the suffix link of this
NOTE CONF
node?
We'll point to this because the path from R to
NOTE CONF
this node is beta, which is that substring A.
Any questions here?
NOTE CONF
repeat that.
OK.
NOTE CONF
All right, don't mind.
I that's, that's fair.
NOTE CONF
That's fair.
So.
NOTE CONF
So let's focus on this node.
What would be the path of this node from the
NOTE CONF
root?
What, what does it spell?
NOTE CONF
A B.
Now by the definition of a suffix link, if you
NOTE CONF
in general if it's R to you spelling out the
letters C, character C followed by some substring beta, what
NOTE CONF
or beta prime, what would be beta prime in that
example?
NOTE CONF
What, what is seen in that example first?
A and beta would be the substring B.
NOTE CONF
Now you have to ask what would be the internal
node V where the root, the path from root to
NOTE CONF
spells out.
Beta.
NOTE CONF
So tell me which node in this tree spells out
the, the uh substring B.
NOTE CONF
That has to be this node, isn't it?
So, this nodes, if that's you, that has to be
NOTE CONF
V.
Now, similarly, let's do once, once again, if this is
NOTE CONF
you, the path here is BA, so beta is A,
the path from root towards A would be that thing,
NOTE CONF
so that would be that.
You and we spend some time thinking about it.
NOTE CONF
I'm not expecting it's, it's, uh, so what I'm expecting
you to get is sort of try and focus in,
NOTE CONF
uh, enough, um, to be able to sort of get
the big picture ideas until you work start working out
NOTE CONF
the finer details.
Once you get the finer details, you'll see that the
NOTE CONF
ideas are really very concise and simple.
OK, yes sir.
NOTE CONF
equal to the case Yes, correct.
So you always would have, if, if you look at,
NOTE CONF
if you look below this tree, if you have you,
you have BAB.
NOTE CONF
So you out, if this is pointing to this, you
also have BAB uh below it.
NOTE CONF
So that structure will be preserved, because at some stage,
you would have done jet extension.
NOTE CONF
Then the next extension would be J + 1.
So all the parts have to be there.
NOTE CONF
Everything from J to I and J + 1 to
I and J + 2 to I and J +3
NOTE CONF
to I, they have to be there.
OK.
NOTE CONF
So, There's no exodus, I hope.
Um, Now, one small terminology which I already introduced.
NOTE CONF
Which is going to be very important when you write
a programme is the notion of an active node and
NOTE CONF
a remainder.
I already told you what a remainder is.
NOTE CONF
So whenever you're applying a rule, you're standing at some
internal node, and that the node that you are standing
NOTE CONF
on is an existing internal node.
You're never stepping on a new internal node that you're
NOTE CONF
creating because you're doing operations standing firmly on an existing
internal node, and then if you're applying rule two.
NOTE CONF
You're looking at the edge below it.
You then operate by inserting a new node and a
NOTE CONF
leaf off it, but you're standing always on an existing
internal node.
NOTE CONF
An active node is where the surgery is carried out,
standing on the node where, and by definition it will
NOTE CONF
be the deepest internal node that already exists.
OK.
NOTE CONF
And we have to now think about a way where
Let's, if you assume that all existing internal nodes already
NOTE CONF
have a suffix link.
Out of it Then you carry out the next extension
NOTE CONF
by following that suffix link.
So active node is where you stand on in any
NOTE CONF
iteration.
OK.
NOTE CONF
Now, What is the remainder?
So we said K to I was the remainder, isn't
NOTE CONF
it?
Whatever is remaining, after which you have to extend I
NOTE CONF
+ 1.
The character I +1.
NOTE CONF
So you have to, you have to, every iteration is
about finding the end of the previous state and extending
NOTE CONF
by one letter.
So when you are at, when you are at U,
NOTE CONF
what is, that's the active node.
The remainder is K K + 1, K + 2
NOTE CONF
all the way to I.
So if you're, if you've covered this much, what's remaining
NOTE CONF
is here, you have to find the end before you
apply the extension.
NOTE CONF
Now, And in every iteration you would have a node
that you stand on and a remainder that you have
NOTE CONF
to process so that you can do the extension after
that.
NOTE CONF
OK, so that's basically two things that you have.
If you know that's the standard, the broad iteration looks
NOTE CONF
like this.
You apply, you're standing on you.
NOTE CONF
And you apply some rule, Rule 1, Rule 2, Rule
3, let's figure out what it is later on.
NOTE CONF
And then once you finish it, rather than go to
the root, you are taking the suffix link and traversing
NOTE CONF
the same remainder, whatever the remainder you traverse, and when
you traverse that, you would get a new.
NOTE CONF
Active node and a new remainder.
If you're traversing more letters, you'll be the remainder gets
NOTE CONF
shorter and shorter because always you're traversing that way.
So once you traverse down, your remainders get shorter and
NOTE CONF
shorter.
Your end point is always I.
NOTE CONF
It'll be chipping away on the left side, because you,
let's say that from V, you went a few nodes
NOTE CONF
down so that you would have gone a few more.
Whatever the string that you have completed, that, that node
NOTE CONF
would be this active node.
Remainder is the string after that, and you can keep
NOTE CONF
track of that information as you're going along.
In fact, you're, you know what the length of your
NOTE CONF
remainder is, and you're shaving off the number of characters
as you're traversing down.
NOTE CONF
Um, down a path.
OK?
NOTE CONF
So just keep that in mind.
So now, I don't worry about the slide, I'll explain
NOTE CONF
it to you very simply.
Now We said, follow the suffix links, follow the money,
NOTE CONF
you know, follow the suffix links.
Why?
NOTE CONF
What made us.
Uh, assume that suffix links exist.
NOTE CONF
When you started the, when you started the, um, the
process, root has no suffix link, uh, well, at least
NOTE CONF
root has suffix link to itself, nothing else.
Then when do new nodes get created?
NOTE CONF
When you not get created in Rule 2, Rule 2.
Would I say, when does the new, the new internal
NOTE CONF
node get created?
Rule 2 regular, isn't it?
NOTE CONF
It's always in Rule 2 regular that you get um
new internal nodes.
NOTE CONF
That means that whenever Rule 2 regular is applied.
I would want to Create a suffix link.
NOTE CONF
Either then, if possible, or if not possible, soon, because
in my extensions, I always have to stand on an
NOTE CONF
existing internal node whose suffix link is known so that
I can follow the suffix link and follow the remainder.
NOTE CONF
Every time active node.
Operate, gives you the remainder, follow the suffix link from
NOTE CONF
U to V, go down the remainder.
It gives you a new active node, a new remainder.
NOTE CONF
Operate Um Whatever the operation that you need in the
J+1, follow the suffix link to its partner and traverse
NOTE CONF
the remainder.
That's the process that you have to do.
NOTE CONF
That's the trail that you have to do.
But in all this, the missing link is, how do
NOTE CONF
we create the suffix link so that whenever we stop
at any existing internal node.
NOTE CONF
We have a suffix link already there.
I mean, in fact, that is the, the, the main
NOTE CONF
point, point of all this.
Now the claim here is that when a new internal
NOTE CONF
nodes.
gets created.
NOTE CONF
So I will draw this a bit more clearly.
So, don't give up.
NOTE CONF
Don't give up on, if you sort of at least
try and hang in there.
NOTE CONF
I can see some faces that say, I can't be
bothered.
NOTE CONF
So Let's say you are on some existing internal node.
Let's pretend that If we reason it from the point
NOTE CONF
of view of an existing internal node already has a
suffix link.
NOTE CONF
To be Now you're standing on this internal node.
Can maybe not read You're standing on this internal node,
NOTE CONF
that's your active node.
You are applying some Rule 2 regular, because that's the
NOTE CONF
only time you would create a new internal node, correct?
So a new internal node gets created.
NOTE CONF
In let's say it's phase 1 + 1, this will
be pointing to I +1, I +1, if it's phase
NOTE CONF
phase I + 1, and this will be pointing to
J.
NOTE CONF
and that's the old path.
Old path goes along that way.
NOTE CONF
Now this is new, you're standing here.
Now the claim is, if that is S.
NOTE CONF
It says that you will always find, so.
By the way, the remainder.
NOTE CONF
if that's K, K to I is the remainder.
Right?
NOTE CONF
So we said J J K minus 1, the same
drill that we had last time, you've covered, that's an
NOTE CONF
active node.
Remainder is K to I.
NOTE CONF
You have created a new internal node S.
Now, I want, this becomes An existing internal node, the
NOTE CONF
moment I get the suffix link.
The claim is that After you're done, the very next
NOTE CONF
extension.
You are going to either find a T that is
NOTE CONF
an existing internal node, or you're going to find a
T which is going to be a new one.
NOTE CONF
Some readers new.
And uh black is old, that's what it's saying.
NOTE CONF
Now, I will give you a very easy visualisation of
why that would be the case.
NOTE CONF
We'll see why that's the case.
Now, if, let's say that you find an existing T,
NOTE CONF
then I can point back to T and that becomes.
Old.
NOTE CONF
Do you agree?
Once that's, so once it gets a suffix link, it
NOTE CONF
is, yeah, done and dusted.
So whenever I'm sitting standing on that node, later on,
NOTE CONF
it is an existing internal node.
So you're, you're safe.
NOTE CONF
Now, what happens when That's new, and that's new as
well.
NOTE CONF
Well, you can still point S to T, that becomes
old.
NOTE CONF
OK.
Now the idea would be that, because it's new in
NOTE CONF
that extension will find.
The same scenario where in the next iteration after that,
NOTE CONF
next extension after that, that gets.
A suffix link out of it.
NOTE CONF
So whenever you create a new internal node, in the
very next extension of the same phase that you created
NOTE CONF
a new internal node, You would find its partner to
link to, whether it is a new one that you
NOTE CONF
have created, the partner could be a new one that
you've created, or it is an existing one.
NOTE CONF
Now.
If If I created a new one now, in the
NOTE CONF
next iteration, next extension, I resolve it.
If the next extension was also new, its next extension
NOTE CONF
will resolve it.
If it's also new, its next extension will resolve it.
NOTE CONF
Now you might ask a question.
There are only a finite number of extensions in a
NOTE CONF
phase, right?
J J +1, J + 2.
NOTE CONF
What if you create a new internal node in the
last extension of a phase?
NOTE CONF
Can you create a new internal node in the last
extension of any phase?
NOTE CONF
Why?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
That's a single character, yes, oh yeah, I was just
gonna say because it's only one character, so I've.
NOTE CONF
Where would you, what would be the active node?
The root would be the active node.
NOTE CONF
The remainder will be empty.
Now you have extend one character.
NOTE CONF
So usually a reminder is end of the previous iteration.
Now you're extending by just one new character in the
NOTE CONF
phase.
So remainder is empty.
NOTE CONF
Your active node is, um, is, uh, is the root.
You don't have to go any further, and you have
NOTE CONF
to extend it by a.
If you extend it by A, what are the so
NOTE CONF
extended by some letter Z, uh, whatever that letter was
at I + 1, what are the possibilities?
NOTE CONF
It's either a letter that already exists or it doesn't.
If it already exists, what rule would it be?
NOTE CONF
Rule 3, if it doesn't, what rule would it be?
Rule 2 alternate.
NOTE CONF
Which doesn't create an existing internal node.
Now I just have to prove to you that that
NOTE CONF
claim is correct, which is a very simple proof if
you understand that abstract strings that we've been drawing writing
NOTE CONF
again, please don't give up, pursue, try your best.
It's a stretch target.
NOTE CONF
We are advanced computer science students and we keep marketing
ourselves to the world's best universities or whatever that nonsense
NOTE CONF
is.
So, um, we have to pretend that we are best.
NOTE CONF
Um I don't believe in total ordering of universities.
I, I think they're useful universities and non-useful universities.
NOTE CONF
I don't think there's a university 1 and university 2
and university 3.
NOTE CONF
It's a, it's madness.
Um, anyway, so, 1 to 1 Let's say you're doing
NOTE CONF
extension J to I extended by I + 1, that's
the new letter I + 1.
NOTE CONF
Let's call the whole thing alpha.
Now If you saw, so when, so when you, when
NOTE CONF
do you say, when do you create a new internal
node?
NOTE CONF
What, what do they say?
When do we, what rule creates a new internal node?
NOTE CONF
Rule 2 regular.
So that would have been alpha.
NOTE CONF
You would have had alphas one or more times with
some character why not equals Z, right?
NOTE CONF
That would have, what would have happened.
OK.
NOTE CONF
Always some same letter, but not equal, equal to Z,
which means that you would have had R some letter
NOTE CONF
K minus 1, so J to K minus 1, and
then K to I.
NOTE CONF
That whole thing is alpha, previously was followed by the
letter.
NOTE CONF
So these are positions.
And then some character Y after that, it's alpha Y.
NOTE CONF
Now, when you get an alpha Z, you would break
that into, um, you would go along that path.
NOTE CONF
I'll get a new Much better.
I + 1, I + 1, and that would be
NOTE CONF
J.
And this one would be Y.
NOTE CONF
And that would basically I+1 I +1 would be the
new letter J.
NOTE CONF
Is that correct?
That's what you would create as S.
NOTE CONF
You created a new internal node S.
Now, What about the next extension when you go from
NOTE CONF
this, so this is going to be you, you go
to V.
NOTE CONF
So this one, the path.
I'm sorry, my Pens are So that is we.
NOTE CONF
So that would, if Um, if that is C beta,
this will be beta.
NOTE CONF
That's what we said it was, right?
That was suffix link.
NOTE CONF
So you don't have to traverse this path.
This path, you don't have to traverse, you only have
NOTE CONF
to traverse the remainder.
Now, tell me what would happen.
NOTE CONF
So if this was C followed by the whole thing
was beta, so beta is only up to that part.
NOTE CONF
Um, so maybe.
They know.
NOTE CONF
Um Um, so it doesn't matter if it's, so let's
call this beta prime.
NOTE CONF
So the whole idea would be that Um Uh, if
you consider the only difference was that I'm using beta,
NOTE CONF
so let's actually keep that as as beta, it doesn't
matter.
NOTE CONF
So the, uh, the, the part I'm trying to make
was that everything will have C beta and C beta
NOTE CONF
as a part of the alphas that you've observed.
So whatever you see here, you would have to see
NOTE CONF
previously as well.
Do you agree to that statement?
NOTE CONF
That means that if there is P1 position P1.
There's a path that is C beta at P1 +
NOTE CONF
1, there would be a path to beta.
Yeah, do you agree to that?
NOTE CONF
There's always going to be a path from, from U
to V because that's the rule of the suffix link
NOTE CONF
from U to V.
That's what we said.
NOTE CONF
So UV has a suffix link.
So if that's C beta, that has to be beta.
NOTE CONF
Do you agree?
So what would be here would be the remainder, which
NOTE CONF
is K all the way to I.
Uh, so, so what that would be K all the
NOTE CONF
way to I.
That would be the same letter.
NOTE CONF
Whatever the letters in that would be here, that would
be the letters also out here.
NOTE CONF
If to make it much more easy to see, I
will reduce the notation to just see beta, and then
NOTE CONF
reason it with respect to S.
Let's actually just, just uh go back one step, just
NOTE CONF
go back one step and see what I'm trying to
say here.
NOTE CONF
So this whole thing.
If we called it C beta, C beta, C beta,
NOTE CONF
what this path would be, will look like would be
root to some U, which is your active node, and
NOTE CONF
then you would have, A new internal node S with
Z going off in that direction, that's I I +
NOTE CONF
11 + 1, and that's pointing to the suffix J.
That's what you would have as a structure here.
NOTE CONF
Do you agree to that, uh, what I've drawn here?
Now, This path is C followed by beta.
NOTE CONF
So C followed by beta because you're doing the extension
K all the way to I, here.
NOTE CONF
Extended to I + 1.
So whatever the C beta, you would see a C
NOTE CONF
beta out here.
Do you agree to that statement?
NOTE CONF
Now Whenever beta is a part, so if let's assume
that you've seen, so uh in the next, what you
NOTE CONF
want to find is the suffix link T, whether old
or new, I'll draw it in blue, old or new
NOTE CONF
suffix link uh of uh the no internal node T
that should be, uh, that should receive the suffix link
NOTE CONF
from S.
What would be its path?
NOTE CONF
From the root.
What should be its path from the root?
NOTE CONF
Its path has to be beta.
Now, do you agree that There's a V.
NOTE CONF
If that is J to K minus 1, this path
will be J + 1 to K minus 1.
NOTE CONF
Do you agree to that statement?
That's because V is the suffix link of um we
NOTE CONF
gets the suffix link from you now.
If every time you saw a beater, it was always.
NOTE CONF
Um, followed by some letter, OK, that is not Z.
What would, every time you saw beta, beta as a
NOTE CONF
is a is a part of alpha, but there could
be beta independently as well, right?
NOTE CONF
So you could actually see beta independently as well, and
I think stopping from strings to appear in general examples.
NOTE CONF
So every time you saw beta, you always saw the
same letter as it was as part of alpha.
NOTE CONF
What would happen?
Would would be new or old?
NOTE CONF
Will be Rule 2 regular or rule 2 alternate because
when you're doing suffix extension J + 1.
NOTE CONF
You have to find J + 1 to N to
I and extend it by Z.
NOTE CONF
But every time you saw beta, you saw the same
letter Y, not equals uh that letter.
NOTE CONF
So that would have to be new, isn't it?
OK.
NOTE CONF
Now, what happens if you saw beta independently um with
letters that are different to Y and Z?
NOTE CONF
What would happen?
Those That would be rule to alternate.
NOTE CONF
That would be rule to alternate.
So you would have an some existing tea with 1
NOTE CONF
X.
Every time you see a beta towards Y, that will
NOTE CONF
be 1 towards Y.
But now you're getting a Z, then you have to
NOTE CONF
do um I + 1, I + 1 in the
direction of J.
NOTE CONF
So there are only two possibilities.
So the key point I'm trying to make is that
NOTE CONF
the structure.
of a shorter path.
NOTE CONF
So this is a longer path, longer by one letter
at the at the top, right?
NOTE CONF
Because C beta, this is beta, this structure would be
more complex than the longer path.
NOTE CONF
Why is it more complex?
Because betas are part of alphas, but betas can appear
NOTE CONF
independently also.
And by that virtue, this T can either be new
NOTE CONF
depending on the possibilities.
The possibilities are when every time you saw a beta,
NOTE CONF
it's the same letter not equal to that character, then
T will be new.
NOTE CONF
When you have multiple branch branches already at the end
of beta, and a new character comes, then that would
NOTE CONF
be an existing internal internal node.
So no matter what, once you have done this extension,
NOTE CONF
you would find, once you find, do the next extension,
you would find a T that is always.
NOTE CONF
Uh, available that you create or that's available so you're
going to have a partner that's that either exists already
NOTE CONF
or is available to receive the suffix link from the
new node that you've created.
NOTE CONF
Now if this is new in the next extension, you
would resolve it and this cascade of creations will terminate.
NOTE CONF
In the penultimate extension, it can never create a new,
um, new internal node in the last extension because the
NOTE CONF
last extension in the worst case has to be Rule
3 or Rule 2 alternate.
NOTE CONF
So this is a.
Just we could uh come to the help desk and
NOTE CONF
we'll work out in more detail, figure out this claim
and see if you can understand this claim a bit
NOTE CONF
more uh intuitively in the help desk sessions.
OK, do come, come there now, now very quickly we
NOTE CONF
will.
Uh, focus on the simple tricks.
NOTE CONF
There's only one of them that needs, uh, focus.
So four tricks are one already, you know, the first
NOTE CONF
trick is space efficient implementation.
The edges are always going to be start point end
NOTE CONF
point.
OK?
NOTE CONF
I don't need to tell you this trick.
You already know it.
NOTE CONF
So whenever any edge, you basically have a start point
and point notation.
NOTE CONF
Now, second trick is when you're traversing.
When you're traversing, and this act more mouthful than it
NOTE CONF
really is, when you're traversing any down a remainder or
down from the, from the route, wherever you're, you're traversing
NOTE CONF
down along a path, you don't have to check one
letter at a time.
NOTE CONF
You don't have to check, does A, so if you're
going down the path, let's assume that you, this is
NOTE CONF
your active node, and your remainder was Z, A, B,
C, D, E, F, G, H, Y, and you pointed
NOTE CONF
to V.
Now I know that that path.
NOTE CONF
So once I traverse this, I know that the path
of the remainder already exists below V.
NOTE CONF
Why?
Because if J to I exists, J + 12 I
NOTE CONF
already exists.
In an implicit suffix tree, you've constructed a suffix tree
NOTE CONF
such that the paths already exist.
Now you're only extending that path.
NOTE CONF
So when you are out here, I'm, all I can
say is now I have my remainder if it is
NOTE CONF
this one.
Now, from V I've said, I want to go in
NOTE CONF
the direction of Z.
How many characters are there on the edge in the
NOTE CONF
direction of Z?
How do I know how many characters are there if
NOTE CONF
I have two numbers?
Start point, end point.
NOTE CONF
End point minus start point plus 1, it will tell
you, well, in this case, in this example, there are
NOTE CONF
2 characters.
If I have two characters in the direction of Z.
NOTE CONF
Would going from this position two characters, would it shoot
past the endpoint?
NOTE CONF
No.
So jump down.
NOTE CONF
Now this becomes your active node.
OK.
NOTE CONF
The active node started here, reverse to V.
I can jump from B to the the node below
NOTE CONF
because there are only 2.
Now I have consumed the two characters, the first two.
NOTE CONF
Now you are going in the direction of B.
Now if I go in the direction of B, there
NOTE CONF
are 2 characters in this example is.
Will I shoot past the endpoint if I go in
NOTE CONF
the direction of B?
The answer is no.
NOTE CONF
So skip down, that's called skip and counting, counting how
many characters you've done previously 2, now 2.
NOTE CONF
So 2 + 24.
So I've covered Z A, B, C already, my active
NOTE CONF
node is here.
Now, I say, well, go in, what is the character
NOTE CONF
after, after that, which is D.
So if it's D, If I go in the direction
NOTE CONF
of D in this example, you have to skip 3.
So DEF is skipped.
NOTE CONF
Now you come here, that's your active node.
Now, in out here, in this example, it's, it's uh
NOTE CONF
set up in a way where you cannot skip past
it because there are more characters than.
NOTE CONF
Where the endpoint is.
So your active node at this iteration would be that
NOTE CONF
node, your remainder would be GHY, OK?
Because you're, you're shaved off on the left hand side.
NOTE CONF
So that's basically going to be all consumed.
So that would be your active node and GHY would
NOTE CONF
be your remainder.
Then you apply one of those rules, OK?
NOTE CONF
That's all, uh, skip counting is the 4 tricks out
of which 2 tricks are trivial.
NOTE CONF
So skip counting is just skipping over rather than doing
character by character comparisons.
NOTE CONF
Character comparison comparisons order N if you see.
Now Showstopper rule.
NOTE CONF
This is also trivial, which is actually, you, you will,
I can, I can bet my life that you will
NOTE CONF
answer it, please, my life is at stake.
So someone answer it.
NOTE CONF
Um, I'll draw it.
Like, I hope.
NOTE CONF
I hope you'll answer it then.
Let's say I have J to I.
NOTE CONF
That's alpha.
The next character is Z at 1 + 1.
NOTE CONF
That's what the phase you're doing.
If you applied In extension the Rule 3.
NOTE CONF
What does it, what does it mean?
It means that I have seen alpha before, followed by
NOTE CONF
the same letter at least once before.
Is that correct?
NOTE CONF
What rule would be J +1?
I want someone who hasn't yet answered to stake my
NOTE CONF
life at it.
And answer it I know No murderous intentions, please.
NOTE CONF
If you can So what if J is rule 3,
what would be J + 1?
NOTE CONF
Anyone who hasn't yet spoken.
It's OK, you're gonna kill me.
NOTE CONF
Uh, I'm saying this in, in light veins, so don't
get it, let it trigger you guys.
NOTE CONF
So I'm just being, um, jovial.
I'm a peaceful human being.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So J + 1 to I by uh extended, so
NOTE CONF
J to I extended by J.
So you've seen alpha J.
NOTE CONF
What would be If this part is beta.
What rule would be J + 1 extension, which rule
NOTE CONF
would that be?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Also rule three, thanks for saving my life.
Why?
NOTE CONF
Because I would have seen Beta J before as well.
In fact, what would be J + 2 + Uh,
NOTE CONF
and what would be the rule at J + 2?
Rule 3.
NOTE CONF
What would be the rule at J + 3 would
be rule 3.
NOTE CONF
All the way to I would be rule 3.
Do you, do you agree?
NOTE CONF
Uh, all the way to I + 1 will be
rule 3 because you've already seen Z before, yeah.
NOTE CONF
So what do you do in rule 3?
Do you change the tree?
NOTE CONF
So if you know that the tree doesn't change, I
can stop my iterations.
NOTE CONF
All this becomes unnecessary, yeah.
Do you agree?
NOTE CONF
Because first time I saw a rule 3, nothing changes
afterwards for that phase, it's the phase showstopper, meaning that
NOTE CONF
you can end that phase and restart the phase.
But we, yes sir.
NOTE CONF
So, uh, so the, the whole idea would be that
if you, um, if you're doing this, uh, explicit extension,
NOTE CONF
so you would get to a point where in.
The in any phase if you see a rule 3,
NOTE CONF
the the condition is in any phase if you see
a rule 3, then it will be Rule 3.
NOTE CONF
So last phase because dollar is always new, you would
never see a rule 3 and all the way to
NOTE CONF
the end and that's why it becomes an explicit suffix
tree, OK, because everything becomes explicit.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, thank you.
I just had to think there for a bit, um,
NOTE CONF
all right, so.
Are you happy with that?
NOTE CONF
There's only one last trick which guarantees to make it
linear.
NOTE CONF
Even if we don't have the time to cover the
linearity proof, that's perfectly fine.
NOTE CONF
I will leave it not non-examinable, but we will cover
the trick, and um we'll, we'll cover that.
NOTE CONF
I'm, I'm happy to go through the proof for anyone
who comes to this uh helpless session, but most, most
NOTE CONF
importantly, I'll be satisfied if you at least got the
tricks, even without the proof of why it is linear.
NOTE CONF
Um, OK, so let's, uh, try and figure out the
last trick.
NOTE CONF
So we can terminate prematurely any phase, but there's always
this annoyance of having to redo the extension for every
NOTE CONF
phase from 123, all the way to I, right?
So, until you see a rule 3.
NOTE CONF
Now, I'm going to make a phenomenal uh observation.
Now If Some Uh, extension J of phase I minus
NOTE CONF
1 was a rule 1.
So let's say phase 1 minus 1, which means that
NOTE CONF
going from I-2 to I-1, you saw a phase one.
What do you think will happen?
NOTE CONF
To The same extension, so that's I minus 1, that's
phase 1, next phase.
NOTE CONF
Yep.
Rule one is extension of the leaf.
NOTE CONF
The last uh endpoint of, of the edge becomes increases
by one.
NOTE CONF
If you saw rule one, yes, sir.
It would also be Rule 1, OK.
NOTE CONF
So the idea would be that when something ends in.
A leaf, and you had this endpoint ending in I.
NOTE CONF
Uh, I minus 1 initially, that gets incremented to I
when you do, that's what we saw in that examples,
NOTE CONF
right?
So every time you extend it, it has to be
NOTE CONF
a leaf extension because you're adding one letter to the,
the path that goes from root all the way down
NOTE CONF
to the leaf.
Previously, I minus 1 ended in the leaf, now I
NOTE CONF
will end in the leaf.
Now, what if this was rule two?
NOTE CONF
What would be this extension?
Now I'll just draw the diagram here.
NOTE CONF
So if rule 2, you'd be looking at you.
That, um, With some path with a new internal node.
NOTE CONF
If I can find so.
When you did this, it was rule two, it would
NOTE CONF
have been I -1, I minus 1, and that would
be J.
NOTE CONF
Once you finish this, OK.
Now, if this is rule, rule to alternate, uh, rule
NOTE CONF
2, this is alternate to alternate to regular would look
like this.
NOTE CONF
Um, Root I minus 1, I minus 1.
And then you would have a path like this, J.
NOTE CONF
So what would this would be too, too regular.
What would happen So if you, if it was rule
NOTE CONF
2, what would be this extension in the next phase?
Same extension, next phase.
NOTE CONF
Did you say rule one?
Raj says rule one.
NOTE CONF
Anyone who thinks it is not anything other than Rule
One.
NOTE CONF
In both cases, This has to change to I.
Yeah That becomes an existing internal node.
NOTE CONF
And that's what will happen, right?
That that will be I ending at I.
NOTE CONF
So that would be rule one.
So what did we say?
NOTE CONF
that if in any previous phase an extension was Rule
1 or Rule 2, That extension becomes Rule 1.
NOTE CONF
You all agree?
That means that if I have, and this is basically
NOTE CONF
the mic drop movement of hang on to your seats,
this is really getting, get very exciting now.
NOTE CONF
So if in any extension, This is, let's say, phase.
I This was the last time.
NOTE CONF
I saw a rule 1 or a rule 2.
So 1 to some position was a rule 1 or
NOTE CONF
2.
In the very next phase, when you extend by one
NOTE CONF
more phase I + 1.
If all this were rule 1 or 2, this has
NOTE CONF
to be rule 1.
Do you agree?
NOTE CONF
Because every time you saw 1 or 2, it became
rule 1.
NOTE CONF
Whether when a J was rule 1, it was rule
1 in the next phase.
NOTE CONF
If J was rule 2 in the previous phase, it's
rule 1 in the current phase.
NOTE CONF
Now, what if I told you that with a simple
trick.
NOTE CONF
Rather than explicitly extending one letter on every edge, I
can do the whole thing in constant time.
NOTE CONF
The whole one to last JI becomes in constant time
becomes a rule one.
NOTE CONF
How would you do it?
Any suggestions?
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Not quite.
NOTE CONF
So here's the rub.
When you create a new internal node.
NOTE CONF
So I'll just go back to that example that we
had.
NOTE CONF
So So when you create.
A new leaf, right?
NOTE CONF
That's a new leaf was created.
Maybe uh earlier example is earlier phases is better.
NOTE CONF
I don't want dollars to be.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, that would.
So here's a case where that red leaf was created.
NOTE CONF
The start point and endpoint was pointing to the phase,
isn't it?
NOTE CONF
And every time the endpoint of a leaf will always
be the phase.
NOTE CONF
So when I created that leaf, I could have called
it.
NOTE CONF
Whatever I, the phase number I had, comma, a global
end, a global end, a pointer that always points to
NOTE CONF
the phase.
Because if I incremented the phase, the global end is
NOTE CONF
in sync with the phase number.
One way to realise global end is instead of creating
NOTE CONF
it as I, I, or in this case, 4.4, I'll
call it as 4.
NOTE CONF
N.
Where N is the end of my string.
NOTE CONF
So when I incremented from phase 4 to phase 5,
now it'll be whatever 5, whatever 6, because N is
NOTE CONF
a proxy for the end of your processing.
You could realise it in many ways.
NOTE CONF
So the idea would be that I can simply make
that whole operation, um, the whole operation that you see
NOTE CONF
here.
So instead of creating it as I, I, I can
NOTE CONF
create it as I N, where global end could be
simple, as simple as N, the end of your string,
NOTE CONF
that's the simplest way to realise it.
I create a leaf node with i comma N where
NOTE CONF
my, my, in my head, if my I is less
than N.
NOTE CONF
I will interpret as I, so I can, I can
basically in my software in my thinking, I will interpret
NOTE CONF
this global end to be in sync with my phase.
So when I created it, the rule runs, once I
NOTE CONF
go from phase I to phase 1 + 1, I
only have to remember this variable the last time I've
NOTE CONF
applied a rule 1 or a Rule 2.
That variable, if I carry with me, then everything before
NOTE CONF
uh from one to last JI will have to be
rule one because of the global end trick.
NOTE CONF
I can automatically with one switch off of once the
loop of the phase goes to the next phase.
NOTE CONF
All extensions from one to last JI completely get sorted
out.
NOTE CONF
You don't have to do anything.
They are sorted out implicitly.
NOTE CONF
So what's remaining is to do suffix extensions from the
next position after last JI and then say.
NOTE CONF
Is that Which rule is that?
If it's rule one or rule two, figure out what
NOTE CONF
rules could happen and in fact, your lab sheet will
will guide you through that thinking.
NOTE CONF
So your last JI in the current iteration moves forward
a bit more.
NOTE CONF
They can either be at the same position as before
or it moves rightwards a bit more.
NOTE CONF
OK, it could either be in the same position, or
once you end this, uh, the phase I +1, your
NOTE CONF
last J of I + 1 would be, um, the
last JI would be less than or equal to last
NOTE CONF
JI + 1.
So, and then in the next iteration, phase 1 +
NOTE CONF
2, Everything from one to this thing or one time
has been leaf extended.
NOTE CONF
Rule 1 has been applied because it's a global end
trick.
NOTE CONF
Always your end is pointing to the phase number, so
this becomes free, then you keep doing, you keep pushing
NOTE CONF
the last JI to the end.
Now, I'm getting close to the time where the recording
NOTE CONF
will break down.
Uh, so what this is essentially saying is that if
NOTE CONF
you did this, this process where if you followed this
thinking you would in any, in any phase you would
NOTE CONF
use, you would repeat uh explicit suffix extension at most
once.
NOTE CONF
Either 0 or 1 time, which means that everything from
1 to last JI is free.
NOTE CONF
You start again from last JI plus 1.
And then last AI plus 1, the next, next point
NOTE CONF
after that, and start your extensions that will ensure that
you're doing the suffix extensions at most once in each
NOTE CONF
one every explicit extension is done at most um um
0 or 1.
NOTE CONF
Sorry, I, I, I should, I, I misspoke.
You do the explicit extension at most twice, so you'll
NOTE CONF
repeat that extension.
You would repeat, uh, an extension at most once.
NOTE CONF
You would repeat an extension whatever you've done previously, you
would repeat it.
NOTE CONF
That's what I meant.
You would either not repeat it or repeat it, which
NOTE CONF
means that.
In every phase, every between every successive phase, you are
NOTE CONF
potentially in the worst case, repeating an explicit suffix extension
to account for the new character, which means that the
NOTE CONF
total number of explicit extensions is bounded by the number
of phases times 2.
NOTE CONF
Because every time, every two successive, I'm repeating it, so
2 N.
NOTE CONF
So what I said is at most once is correct,
but the way you interpret it is that going from
NOTE CONF
I to I + 1, you're repeating 1.
Going from I + 1 to I + 2, you
NOTE CONF
could repeat 1.
I + 2 to I I I I + 2
NOTE CONF
to I + 3, you repeat 1 at most.
Sometimes you don't repeat it, so the worst case you
NOTE CONF
have done the explicit explicit extensions twice the number of
uh extensions that are uh the number of positions in
NOTE CONF
the strings that would be to end, but that is
not the entire reasoning why it's linear.
NOTE CONF
There's a small, I will, I will leave, um, I,
I already mentioned that the last extension is makes it
NOTE CONF
so the very last extension.
When you do dollar, it becomes explicit.
NOTE CONF
So I have just one, this slide I haven't yet
explained to you, but I'll leave it non-examinable.
NOTE CONF
But what the only because, uh, the recording will cut
off, so I'm just trying to rush my words here.
NOTE CONF
So what, um, uh, everything I'm gonna say now is
non-examinable.
NOTE CONF
So there's the utmost.
Um, you, you, there'll be at most 2 and explicit
NOTE CONF
extensions because between two successive extensions you, you would repeat
0 or 1 explicit, uh, extensions explicitly, so, um.
NOTE CONF
That would give you a linear bound on a number
of explicit.
NOTE CONF